This year the iGEM Team Hamburg is determined to construct a biosensor against Chlamydia trachomatis, a pathogenic bacterium that is transmitted sexually and has an adverse health effect in developing countries. There the problem is less the treatment, which can be easily done by broadband antibiotics, but the diagnostic identification of the exact bacterial strain. And these diagnostic methods are costly, since they mostly rely on immunologic methods like antibody-staining, ranging between 30 to 150 Dollars. This is fine in industrial nations, but for many people in developing countries living close to the poverty line (1.25$ per day) this is far from affordable. Noteworthy is also the widespread incidence of chlamydial infections, as well as the severity with which the disease can progress. Estimated 89 million people worldwide are affected by Chlamydia trachomatis, 4 million of which have lost their eyesight due to the namegiving trachoma that forms when the bacterium infects the conjunctiva of the eye, leading to cicatrization.   

To combat this, the iGEM Team Hamburg is developing a fusionprotein-biosensor, used in diagnostic bacteria, to offer an inexpensive alternative to present diagnostic methods for medical doctors in developing nations.
is constructing a fusionprotein with signaling pathway to function as a biosensor in prokaryotes. EnvZ-NOD1 fusionprotein, activating transcription factor OmpR, after sensing an unincorporated building block protein of the peptidoglycane membrane of Chlamydia trachomatis.  

The fusionprotein is then to be used in diagnostic bacteria, which - for biosafety purposes - are locked in an inexpensive microfluidic device.During the last wintersemester our P.I. and patron Prof. Dr. Zoya Ignatova has been inviting guest speakers for lectures about synthetic biology, and we have been gathering ideas for the project of this years competition. In March 2016 we had decided and started collecting sponsors to finance the project. Over the last few months we started constructing different reporter systems, based on fluorescence, bioluminescence and other methods of signalling. We also optimized the EnvZ/NOD1 fusion protein for the host organism's code bias and constructed our fusionprotein in way that allows simple restriction and insertion of other periplasmic sensing domains. The nanoscientists of our iGEM Team are in the process of testing alginate incapsulation for additional biosafety in our microfluidic device, and the first results are looking good. 

